You probably shouldn't actually
be impressed at this point,
because we haven't done
anything awesome yet.
Enums just haven't gotten fantastic yet.
So this next example is
gonna get pretty exciting.
Sorry, I've already gone over this point.
This is me just saying, hey,
you could do the same thing in TypeScript.
So I haven't really done
anything impressive.
It just looks a little different.
All right, so
you might get pretty offended here,
because I'm gonna say something
mean about TypeScript.
So I want everyone to breathe it out,
it's gonna happen.
So what I want you to do is I want you
to create a custom type called Custom.
So it's just gonna have two fields age,
that's a number so
you guys can get started now, just to
kind of read this out and a name string.
I want you to create a union type
of number, string, and custom and
it's going to be called Item.
Then I want you to create a method called
append that takes in a list of items and
pushes, Hello Frontend Masters.
Then I want you to create a list of Items
doesn't matter if it's empty or not, and
then pass it to append.
So I'll do that as you do that.
So let's go back over to
our nice TypeScript file.
I'm just going to delete everything.
And so the first thing is let's
create our custom type, right?
It should have an age, number,
and name string, fantastic.
Okay, so we have our custom type.
Now let's create our union type.
So let's go down here and go type Item
equals number or string or custom.
I worked once not too long ago at Netflix.
I actually had a Mongo database that I had
to grab some real-time events out of and
it had 150 different type events and
not a single discriminator on it.
So I had, this was just a real part of my
life for union types in which I had to
suss out property names to try to
type narrow into actual events.
It was really painful.
If I only had Rust,
I had to use TypeScript.
I could have just used enums
to solve all my problems, but
I just went through
the emotional ringer there.
All right, so now let's create
a function called append, and
it's going to take in a list of items.
And it's going to mutate that
items with push.hello fem.
Awesome, so now let's create a list
of items and let's pass it to append.
So I'm gonna go cost items.
I'm gonna just define it right here so
TypeScript knows and
I'm gonna go append items.
Everything's fine, right?
We should be able to do this because
items are number or string or custom.
So I'll even do a little
console.log (items) here.
Yank that, put it right here.
So we kind of have this little
double thing going on right here.
And I can go over to npx ts-node.
And when I execute it, you can see it went
from no items to having an item in it.
Okay, pretty neat.
Yeah, union types.
All right, one more task.
I want you to create a list of numbers and
I want you to try to pass it to append.
So, const numbers is
gonna be a number array.
And I'm gonna call append.
Where's your god now, TypeScript?
Why am I allowed to pass in an array of
numbers into something that clearly takes
an array of items and
I'm pushing a string into it?
Where's my complaints?
I could take items right here.
I could print out all of that.
And look at that.
My list of numbers has a string in it.
What the heck?
Isn't that emotionally
bruising just a little bit?
Come on, okay, I care about it.
But apparently no one else cares about it.
Okay, so I hate that.
Let's see how Rust handles it.
Okay, we're going to do
the exact same thing.
Let's create a struct called custom.
Let's create a union type called Item.
Let's create an append method
that takes in a list of Items.
Let's add the string Hello Fem to it.
And then in our main function,
let's create that list of Items and
pass it to append.
Okay, so we'll do it one at a time here.
So I'm just gonna delete
everything inside of here.
Create a new main function.
All right, beautiful.
So first, let's create our struct custom.
Struct custom,
it's gonna have an age, usize.
It would make no sense to have
a negative number for age.
You can't live in the future like that.
And then let's do name,
just capital S string.
That makes sense, right?
Okay, now we need to do the item,
a union type, right?
Well, now we're gonna
use something beautiful.
We're gonna use an enum to do this, what?
All right, so we're gonna call it Item,
man, I'm just so excited.
All right, I hope everyone's ready.
So let's first start with the number case.
So I'm gonna call it number.
I'm gonna do a stubborn, do one of these.
I know, what is that, a function?
And I'm gonna say, usize.
Okay, I'm gonna do it again and
I'm gonna do String.
And inside of here, I'm gonna do String.
And then I'm gonna go MyCustom,
inside of here I'm gonna have custom,
the data type we just defined right there.
Look at those guys, right there.
Okay, so can anyone guess
what's happening right here?
Our enums can have subtypes.
And now it slowly should start expanding
your brain making you think, holy cow,
what's happening?
We've just added type discrimination in
a way in which there is no way to have
a type discriminator.
So this would be something that's
equivalent to wrapping every single one of
these items in type number,
value number, type string, value string,
type custom, value custom in TypeScript.
And then doing a type discriminator on
it to see if it's actually that type.
Then you'd have to do run time guards
of if type is equal to number,
I know my value is now a number.
And so we're doing that, but
we're doing this at a language level,
which is pretty fantastic.
Underneath the hood,
an enum is just a union type, and
c is how you can think of it.
So number is type zero and
it has a usize for its data value.
The next one is type string or
one type string and
then it has the string data structure for
it.
The third one which is probably value two
has the custom data structure for it.
And so an enum should be the size of
whatever your largest data type is
underneath the hood.
You don't really need to
know about the memory part,
but that's what's happening
underneath the hood.
And so it's doing all that magic for
you, if you've ever worked with C stuff.
All right, so
let's create that append function.
So append is gonna need to take in items,
which is gona be a mutable reference to
a Vec of Item, right, a list of items.
We need them mutated.
So we have to have a mutable reference,
it's very important.
And I'm gonna keep on
saying mutable like that.
Makes it more fun.
All right, so items.push.
Now notice I cannot go like this,
Hello Frontend Masters.
Look what it says.
It says, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
You can't just hand me
a reference to a stir.
You have to hand me an item, okay?
So I'm gonna have to go like this and
I'm gonna have to go Item::String and
then I can pass in, hello Fem.
Now of course,
it's gonna do one more complaint because
you're passing in a stir, not a string.
I didn't want to do lifetimes.
So this is me avoiding lifetimes.
So at the end of your
string you can call into.
We'll actually get into into here shortly.
Into is just a trait that says, hey,
I want you to convert this
thing into the right type.
And don't worry, you know the type.
It knows it's supposed to be a string.
It's a stir, a stir can become a string or
you could call something like
to_string on it and a create a string.
Because remember a string is
something that exists on the heap so
we need our own version, our own copy.
So when I call to_string it creates
its own copy of hello, Fem.
So that means if I go like this
let items which is gonna be
a Vec of item equals veck bang,
there we go.
I can now call append with
a mutable reference to items.
Of course, it's going to complain,
I can't borrow items as mutable
cuz you never said it was mutable.
So let's jump up here.
I've now stated it's mutable.
We can now pass it to append, it works.
Now one thing I can't just go off and
do is I can't just go off and
say have a Vec of usize and
call append, why not?
I literally cannot express the same
thing that TypeScript can.
The reason being is that a discriminated
union has been built for me.
Whereas in TypeScript land, it's just
like it could be one of these types.
So we can't have the same level as
expression, but this level of expression
allows for lists to be different types,
but all in one list together.
And then gives you this safety.
You could just literally never run into
a situation where you don't have items
inside of a list.
Whereas in this other one, you could have
numbers that accidentally have strings or
items or whatever because of how
TypeScript works versus how Rust works.
Pretty cool, right?
Okay, so
now we're starting to get pretty cool.
Come on, tell me this is where it's
starting to get pretty cool, right?
Well, this means you don't have to do any
more of this type of x equals number.
You don't have to do a property check
to try to type narrow yourself down.
You have match statements.
You have pattern matching to match
yourself into what you want it to be.
Pretty nice, okay.
So there's no more magic type checking.
I like that a whole bunch.
Again, I already mentioned this.
We technically could have got around this
in TypeScript land by creating a wrapper
type, a box value, to be able to
discriminate against the three.
And so let's talk a little bit
more about pattern matching.
I just want to make sure I have
this all in here because I don't
remember how much exactly I covered it but
right here.
So if I create an item number with
the value 5 in it, I can match on foo and
handle each one of the different cases,
pulling out the inner value or
the inner type.
So this is a usize.
This is a string.
This is a custom.
Because I've pattern matched I'm
grabbing out the inner value.
You can think of it like a lift operator.
I'm lifting out the value or the sub type.
With match you can just have
only the one you care about,
and then ignore everything else.
Underscore just means every
other possible pattern, do this.
It's kind of like a default case.
You can also do pattern matching
in the pattern matching.
Yo dawg,
I heard you like pattern matching.
So I can do, hey,
I'm gonna pattern match a custom.
And then that inner type, I'm gonna
pattern match the struct Custom and
only grab the age out.
So now I have reference to just age.
It's pretty cool.
So you can just keep on pattern matching
as much as you need to do and then you get
the most optimal highly compiler optimized
code out that just refers to age.
That's pretty good.
You don't have to do all that checking
in if statements, which is a runtime
costs, or as this thing's probably
just some sweet offset that's
happening inside of a struct.
Lastly, you can do this kind of
thing where you do an if statement,
even inside your pattern match.
So I can pattern match custom if the
customer's name is Ricky, I can go hey,
Ricky, or
if the customer's age is greater than 33,
I can tell right away
you like Nintendo 64.
But if your age is less than 30,
you probably love Xbox.
And so I can do these kind of like if
statements on addition to the match
statement.
And then in the end, it's gonna tell
me I haven't covered every case yet.
So I have to provide a default case.
So it's pretty cool what you can
do with pattern matching and
then even what you can combine with it.
It allows for pretty cool stuff.
One really cool one is
if you have a vector and
you want to be able to grab the first and
last element out of it, but
it may be empty, it may have one item,
it may have more than one item.
You can actually pattern match first and
last, and so only first and
last that exist.
You can grab those two out and the rest
cases you don't wanna handle anything.
There's like a lot of super cool.
There's so many ways you can solve
problems with pattern matching.
I feel emotional about.
I don't even know all the things.
All right, do we have any questions?
Speak up.
>> Yeah, one quick question.
If you scroll up the pattern matching,
does it always have to be an expression
kind of written out or could you do
like call function to match the pattern?
>> No, it has to be an expression
that's written out.
It has to be, it's a static thing
because it's compiled at this point.
So again, if you don't know anything about
what's happening underneath the hood or
you haven't used C style unions, when we
create our little item, what's actually
happening in memory is that there's
the first part is the type discriminator,
the second part is the data.
And so 0 usize, I always put a z there.
1 is a string, which is a pointer,
Length, capacity and then that thing,
this pointer goes off onto the heap.
And then two, you're gonna have custom.
Which is gonna be age, which is a usize
and then it's gonna have the name,
which is gonna be the same thing pointer
length capacity also off on here.
And so when you do pattern matching,
your item custom line is pretty
much the same thing as saying,
hey, when it's 2, go into this branch.
So it's able to do that.
So that's why you can't do a function,
because it can't compile that thing in.
It can't, it's dynamic.
And so you see the same thing with
switch statements, if I'm not mistaken,
you can't have,
at least in a lot of languages,
you can't have a dynamic item
within the switch statement.
Because the switch statement is
meant to do a table offset into it.
So it's supposed to be faster than an if
statement, a bunch of else ifs because it
can just do a table offset,
that's why it's supposed to happen.
Now whether or not that actually
happens like in the JavaScript land,
I just have no idea.